Documentation for Just in time mapping (#492)
precice/precice.github.io: pages/docs/couple-your-code/couple-your-code-just-in-time-mapping.md

---
title: Just-in-time data mapping
permalink: couple-your-code-just-in-time-mapping.html

> keywords: api, adapter, mapping, meshes, just-in-time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
keywords: api, adapter, mapping, meshes, just-in-time, mesh-particle coupling, DEM
```

> summary: "You can read and write data by providing dynamic coordinates instead of static vertex IDs using specific optional API functions."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: "You can read and write data at dynamic coordinates instead of static vertex IDs using specific optional API functions."
```

---

{% version 3.2.0 %}
This feature is new in preCICE version 3.2.0.
{% endversion %}

{% experimental %}
This is an experimental feature.

> {% endexperimental %}

Reviewer: We should add somewhere (here?) that the experimental switch in the config needs to be enabled, right?

> Just-in time data mapping combines the idea of a [direct-mesh access](couple-your-code-direct-access.html) with the [conventional mapping](configuration-mapping.html) methods in preCICE: a solver does not provide a static mesh during the initialization phase, but instead defines an access region, in which vertices and data can be read and written to and from preCICE just-in-time. Using the just-in-time API (see below) of preCICE comes with performance implications: reading and writing becomes more expensive, but it gives the user more flexibility for moving meshes. The feature was originally designed with mesh-particle coupling in mind: one participant (the mesh-based participant) defines a static mesh during initialization, and the other participant (particle participant) defines a spatial access region, where data can be provided just-in-time along with the current particle position. The feature might be useful for other scenarios as well. The following sections describe the API the configuration and limitations of the current implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just-in time data mapping combines the idea of [direct-mesh access](couple-your-code-direct-access.html) with the [conventional mapping](configuration-mapping.html) methods in preCICE: a solver does not provide a static mesh during the initialization phase, but instead defines an access region, in which vertices and data can be read and written to and from preCICE just-in-time. Using the just-in-time API (see below) of preCICE comes with performance implications: reading and writing becomes more expensive, but it gives the user more flexibility for moving meshes. The feature was originally designed with mesh-particle coupling in mind: one participant (the mesh-based participant) defines a static mesh during initialization, and the other participant (particle participant) defines a spatial access region, where data can be provided just-in-time along with the current particle position. The feature might be useful for other scenarios as well. The following sections describe the API, the configuration, and the limitations of the current implementation.
```

## Concept and API

> Using Just-in-time mapping requires smaller configuration changes in the precice configuration file and the source code of the adapter. The following configuration is an example for a just-in-time mapping preCICE configuration of our example participant called "SolverOne":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using just-in-time mapping requires small configuration changes in the preCICE configuration file and the source code of the adapter. The following configuration is an example for a just-in-time mapping configuration of an example participant called "SolverOne":
```

```xml
  <participant name="SolverOne">
    <receive-mesh name="ReceivedMeshName" from="SolverTwo" api-access="true" />

>     <!-- data reading and writing is performed on MeshTwo, which is a received mesh with api-access enabled -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <!-- data reading and writing is performed on ReceivedMeshName, which is a received mesh with api-access enabled -->
```
Maybe "ReceivedMesh" is better than "ReceivedMeshName"? "SolverTwo-Mesh" would still be good IMO.

>     <read-data name="Velocities" mesh="ReceivedMeshName" />
>     <write-data name="Forces" mesh="ReceivedMeshName" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <read-data name="Velocity" mesh="ReceivedMeshName" />
    <write-data name="Force" mesh="ReceivedMeshName" />
```

    <!-- define the just-in-time mapping (read-consistent) to read the velocities, note the empty "to" mesh for the read direction-->
    <mapping:nearest-neighbor direction="read" from="ReceivedMeshName" constraint="consistent" />

>     <!-- define the just-in-time mapping (write conservative) to write forces just-in-time, note the empty "from" mesh for the write direction-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <!-- define the just-in-time mapping (write-conservative) to write forces, note the empty "from" mesh for the write direction-->
```

    <mapping:nearest-neighbor direction="write" to="ReceivedMeshName" constraint="conservative" />
  </participant>
```

> Here, "SolverOne" now defines a just-in-time mapping access in read-direction for data "Velocities" and in write direction for data "Forces". In its core, using just-in-time mapping requires three changes in the configuration file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"SolverOne" defines access through just-in-time mappings in read direction for velocities and in write direction for forces. In its core, using just-in-time mappings requires three changes in the configuration file:
```

1. `api-access` needs to be enabled on the `receive-mesh` (similar to the direct access), "ReceivedMeshName" in our example above.
2. The `read-data` and `write-data` tags need to use the received mesh with api-access enabled.
3. The mapping only defines (depending on the direction) a "from" or a "to" mesh. For read-consistent mappings, only the "from" mesh must be defined. For write-conservative mappings, only the "to" mesh must be defined. In both cases, the defined mesh needs to match the received mesh with api-access enabled (which is also used in the `read-data` or `write-data` tag).

> At its core, the API now makes use of two new API functions, called `mapAndReadData` and `mapAndWriteData`. Both functions are very similar to the analogous functions `readData` and `writeData`: the only difference is that the functions take spatial coordinates as function arguments instead of static vertexIDs stemming from the preCICE initialization. In addition to `mapAndReadData` and `mapAndWriteData`, the access region needs to be defined by "SolverOne" using `setMeshAccessRegion`. The full code example reads the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API makes use of two new API functions, called `mapAndReadData` and `mapAndWriteData`. Both functions are very similar to the analogous functions `readData` and `writeData`: The only difference is that the functions take spatial coordinates as function arguments instead of static vertexIDs. In addition to `mapAndReadData` and `mapAndWriteData`, the access region needs to be defined by "SolverOne" using `setMeshAccessRegion`. A full code example reads as follows:
```

> At its core, the API now makes use of two new API functions, called `mapAndReadData` and `mapAndWriteData`. Both functions are very similar to the analogous functions `readData` and `writeData`: the only difference is that the functions take spatial coordinates as function arguments instead of static vertexIDs stemming from the preCICE initialization. In addition to `mapAndReadData` and `mapAndWriteData`, the access region needs to be defined by "SolverOne" using `setMeshAccessRegion`. The full code example reads the following:

Reviewer: There is still the ongoing discussion in https://github.com/precice/precice/issues/1843: `readDataAt` and `writeDataAt` as alternative names. Once concluded there, we need to update here.

Author: We converged to names. Updated them here as well.

```cpp
    // Note that "ReceivedMeshName" is defined and received
    // from another participant
    const std::string otherMesh = "ReceivedMeshName";

    // Allocate and fill a 'boundingBox' to define an access region
    // in our example, we use the unit cube.
    // Assuming dim == 3, means that the bounding box has
    // dim * 2 == 6 elements.
    std::vector<double> boundingBox {
        0, 0, 0, // minimum corner
        1, 1, 1 // maximum corner
    };

>     // Define region of interest, where we want to obtain the direct access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Define region of interest, where we want to obtain API access.
```

>     // See also the API documentation of this function for further notes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This should be clear.

    precice.setMeshAccessRegion(otherMesh, boundingBox);

    // initialize preCICE as usual
    // initializing data (requiresInitialData) before calling initialize is not possible, as we first need to exchange the

>     // meshes before being able to access the mesh

Reviewer: What does "not possible" exactly mean? Return false? Throws an error?
What if other data (e.g. in a different coupling scheme) requires initialization?

Author: "not possible" means that it is not possible by construction.

Usually, we have 

```
requiresInitialData() -> initialize() -> getMeshVertexIDsAndCoordinates()
```
where the last function gives us only the IDs we need for `writeData` inside the `requiresInitialData()`, i.e., the above is not possible at all, as we simply don't have the vertex IDs where we need them (inside the `requiresInitialData()`.

Reviewer: Being more explicit could probably help here. It is still allowed to call `requiredInitialData()` as other meshes could need this.

    precice.initialize();

    // until this point, everything was just the same as for
    // the direct mesh access, now we enter the main time loop

>     // and use dedicated read and write functions

Reviewer: I think we could use wider comments here. Do you break at 80 chars?

Author: Removed the linebreaks

Reviewer: I assume you checked how this looks rendered?

Author: In the initial version, yes. In the updated version it looks as follows

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/19d6cf0e-d8e9-4864-994d-58e80c0c01c1)

which exceeds the box size. The initial version was this one:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b56ada78-b53c-46fa-80e3-0744a5f1d535)

what exactly would you like?

Reviewer: how do we do this in other code examples? automatic wrap would be nice.
or as a compromise sth between both of your versions: same length as the longest code length?

Author: used now clang-format with `ColumnLimit:     87` (which is the longest code line)

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c20d1c2a-2edf-49b5-9e52-79256abb200d)

Reviewer 2: I can add my Python perspective here: In `autopep8` the default is also 80 characters. In the CI of preCICE-related Python projects I set the limit to 120. See [here](https://github.com/precice/python-bindings/blob/1cba0cffb9d595bda807660387ff09167e3dee6a/.github/workflows/check-pep8.yml#L18). Main motivation for this change was that I wanted to avoid linebreaks in preCICE API calls that show up regularly.[^1]

87 sounds to me pretty arbitrary. I would not use this value. Under https://stackoverflow.com/questions/88942/why-does-pep-8-specify-a-maximum-line-length-of-79-characters you can find some further discussion on the topic.

[^1]: e.g. [this line](https://github.com/precice/python-bindings/blob/1cba0cffb9d595bda807660387ff09167e3dee6a/examples/solverdummy/solverdummy.py#L44) has 98 characters.

Reviewer: The "87" version looks decent to me. I am pretty to sure that we do this pretty arbitrarily across all code blocks in the documentation. 

@BenjaminRodenberg We rightfully have higher standards in codes than docs :)

If we really want a consistent solution, I would suggest to go ahead here with 87 and open an issue instead.

    while (precice.isCouplingOngoing()) {

        // reading data requires a time stamp (relative read
        // time) for time interpolation, which we need below
        // we simply select here the end of the time window
        double dt = couplingInterface.getMaxTimeStepSize();

        // The just-in-time reading function: its interface
        // is very similar to the conventional readData
        // function, only the vertexIDs are now dynamic
        // coordinates:

        // we need a vector, where we store the data we read

>         std::vector<double> velocityValue(1);

Reviewer: If we use velocities and forces, we should go to vectorial data. Will otherwise be confusing.

Author: used vectorial data

        // access region
        std::vector<double> readCoordinates({0.1, 0.5, 0.2});
        precice.mapAndReadData(otherMesh, "Velocities", readCoordinates, dt, velocityValue);

        // compute the next timestep solution using the data
        // read from preCICE

        // Similarly, the just-in-time writing function: here,
        // we have the write function, where only the vertexIDs
        // are now replaced by dynamic coordinates

        // we need a vector to pass the write data
        std::vector<double> forceValue({7.3});
        // ... and we define the coordinates where we want to
        // write the data just-in-time. Note that the sizes
        // need to match: we write one scalar value and provide
        // coordinates of a three-dimensional vertex
        // the function can be called abitrarily many times
        // and the coordinates may be anything within the
        // access region
        // however,
        std::vector<double> writeCoordinates({0.75, 0.2, 0.3});
        precice.mapAndWriteData(otherMesh, "Forces", writeCoordinates, forceValue);

        // finally advance to the next timestep, as usual
        precice.advance(dt);
    }
```

> A more comprehensive description of all involved API function and their arguments is given in our [doxygen API documentation](/doxygen/main/classprecice_1_1Participant.html) (see the section on Just-in-time mapping). Many other configuration and code examples can be found in related [integration tests](https://github.com/precice/precice/tree/develop/tests/serial/just-in-time-mapping). Just-in-time mapping includes full support for [time interpolation](couple-your-code-waveform.html) and subcycling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A more comprehensive description of all involved API function and their arguments is given in the [API documentation](/doxygen/main/classprecice_1_1Participant.html) (see the section on just-in-time mapping). Many other configuration and code examples can be found in related [integration tests](https://github.com/precice/precice/tree/develop/tests/serial/just-in-time-mapping). Just-in-time mapping includes full support for [time interpolation](couple-your-code-waveform.html) and subcycling.
```

## Limitations

> Just-in-time data mapping is currently only implemented for the mapping combinations read-consistent (`<mapping:... direction="read" constraint="consistent"/>`) and write-conservative (`<mapping:... direction="write" constraint="conservative"/>`). Furthermore, only the mapping types `<mapping:nearest-neighbor .../>`, `<mapping:rbf .../>` and `<mapping:rbf-pum-direct .../>` are implemented. The general configuration of other mapping attributes follows the usual [mapping convention](configuration-mapping.html), i.e., configuring a `rbf-pum-direct` mapping for a just-in-time mapping would look as follows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just-in-time data mapping is currently only implemented for the mapping combinations read-consistent (`<mapping:... direction="read" constraint="consistent"/>`) and write-conservative (`<mapping:... direction="write" constraint="conservative"/>`). Furthermore, only the mapping types `<mapping:nearest-neighbor .../>` and `<mapping:rbf-pum-direct .../>`, and the alias `<mapping:rbf .../>` are implemented. The general configuration of other mapping attributes follows the usual [mapping convention](configuration-mapping.html), i.e., configuring a `rbf-pum-direct` mapping for a just-in-time mapping would look as follows:
```
